---
layout: page
title: Security and Risk Management
description: October 2024
nav-menu: true
nav-order: 4
summary: >-
  Investigated security governance and quantitative risk assessment, aligning
  NIST, ISO 27001, and STRIDE practices with legal, ethical, and communication
  requirements for stakeholders.
---

<section id="introduction">
  <h2>Security and Risk Management</h2>
  <p>
    This module introduced the fundamentals of information security and risk 
    management, focusing on how organisations identify, analyse, and mitigate risks 
    in response to evolving cyber threats. Analysing real-world case studies 
    deepened my understanding of how legal, social, and ethical considerations shape
    professional practice and taught me to align security controls with 
    organisational objectives. Collaborative and individual projects enhanced my 
    skills in threat assessment, risk quantification, and effective communication 
    with technical and non-technical audiences (<em>ENISA, 2023</em>).
  </p>
</section>

<hr>

<section id="learning-outcomes">
  <h3>Learning Outcomes</h3>
  <p>I will be able to:</p>
  <ul>
    <li>Identify and analyse critical security risks, threats, and 
vulnerabilities in information systems.</li>
    <li>Evaluate methodologies, tools, and frameworks (NIST, ISO 27001, STRIDE) 
for mitigating business risks (<em>Deloitte, 2020</em>).</li>
    <li>Apply legal, ethical, and social principles to decision-making in 
information security (<em>Huda, 2024</em>).</li>
    <li>Communicate and justify risk management strategies to diverse 
audiences.</li>
    <li>Reflect on professional growth and continuous learning in 
cybersecurity.</li>
  </ul>
</section>

<hr>

<section id="artefacts-feedback">
  <h3>Artefacts and Feedback</h3>
  
  <p><strong>Team Project â€“ Pampered Pets Risk Identification 
Report:</strong><br>
  As a member of Group D, I contributed to a comprehensive risk assessment for a
 fictional companyâ€™s digital transformation, focusing on the NIST framework and 
 STRIDE methodology. Our report was commended for its structure but needed more 
 detailed control recommendations. This experience highlighted the need to 
 connect each control to measurable business value and develop mitigation 
 strategies tailored to specific risks.</p>

  <p>
    <a href="https://github.com/diogoneno/diogoneno.github.io/blob/main/assets/SecurityandRiskManagement/Assignments/Development%20Team%20Project%20Group%20D.pdf" 
       target="_blank" rel="noopener">
        ðŸ“„ Risk Identification Report â€“ Group D (PDF)
    </a>
  </p>

  <p><strong>Individual Executive Summary â€“ Security Risk 
Management:</strong><br>
  This project marked a significant milestone as I integrated knowledge from 
previous units into a strategic report using Monte Carlo simulations for 
quantitative risk modelling. Transitioning from qualitative to probabilistic 
analysis enhanced my ability to justify security investments with data-driven 
insights.</p>

  <p>
    <a href="https://github.com/diogoneno/diogoneno.github.io/blob/main/assets/SecurityandRiskManagement/Assignments/executivesummarysecurityRisk.pdf" 
       target="_blank" rel="noopener">
        ðŸ“„ Executive Summary â€“ Security Risk Management (PDF)
    </a>
  </p>

  <p><strong>Reflective Review â€“ Professional Growth:</strong><br>
  The reflective review allowed me to evaluate my development from a technically
 oriented practitioner to a strategic security professional. Tutor feedback 
 recognised my progress in integrating ethics, analytics, and communication into 
 a coherent professional narrative.</p>

  <p>
    <a href="https://github.com/diogoneno/diogoneno.github.io/blob/main/assets/SecurityandRiskManagement/Assignments/ReflectiveReviewSecurityandRiskMan.pdf" 
       target="_blank" rel="noopener">
        ðŸ“„ Reflective Review â€“ Professional Growth (PDF)
    </a>
  </p>
</section>

<hr>

<section id="reflections">
  <h3>Reflections and Learning Highlights</h3>

  <p>Examining privacy laws showed that security involves not only technical 
systems but also people, accountability, trust, and ethical responsibility 
beyond compliance.</p>

  <p><strong>Team Project:</strong><br>
  This project reinforced the value of teamwork and effective stakeholder 
communication. Handling disagreements required balancing perspectives and 
achieving evidence-based consensus.</p>

  <p><strong>Individual Executive Project:</strong><br>
  Developing quantitative risk models expanded my technical skills, while 
explaining Monte Carlo simulations in business terms improved executive 
communication and increased confidence in data-driven decision-making.</p>

  <p><strong>Reflective Practice:</strong><br>
  Continuous reflection using Gibbsâ€™ and Rolfeâ€™s models enabled me to identify 
areas for improvement, adapt my learning strategies, and apply theory to 
professional practice (<em>Rolfe, Freshwater and Jasper, 2001</em>).</p>
</section>

<hr>

<section id="skills-matrix">
  <h3>Professional Skills Matrix and Action Plan</h3>

  <h4>Skills Gained or Enhanced</h4>
  <ul>
    <li>Strategic risk thinking and alignment with business goals (<em>Deloitte,
 2020</em>)</li>
    <li>Quantitative analysis using probabilistic methods (<em>ENISA, 
 2023</em>)</li>
    <li>Threat modelling and attack tree analysis</li>
    <li>Stakeholder communication and executive reporting</li>
    <li>Ethical reasoning and legal compliance awareness</li>
    <li>Teamwork and collaborative decision-making</li>
    <li>Resilience planning and incident response design</li>
    <li>Reflective practice and lifelong learning</li>
  </ul>

  <h4>Action Plan</h4>
  <ul>
    <li><strong>Short-Term:</strong> Each week, review the latest ENISA threat 
reports and summarise key findings to track emerging attack vectors.</li>
    <li><strong>Medium-Term:</strong> Develop risk models for two business 
scenarios using Monte Carlo simulation and integrate the results into an 
executive dashboard.</li>
    <li><strong>Long-Term:</strong> Enrol in a CISSP or CISM certification 
course to consolidate technical expertise and acquire management-level 
competencies.</li>
  </ul>
</section>

<hr>

<section id="key-takeaways">
  <h3>Key Takeaways</h3>
  <p>This module taught me that effective security is both technical and 
strategic. Key turning points included recognising that compliance builds trust,
 risk quantification supports informed decisions, and reflection drives ongoing 
 growth.</p>
  <p>This module has enabled me to approach cybersecurity with analytical 
rigour, ethical awareness, and strategic visionâ€”core competencies I intend to 
apply in my professional practice. Moving forward, I am confident in leveraging 
these skills to drive effective security strategies, foster trust within 
organisations, and adapt to emerging risks through continued learning and 
reflection.</p>
</section>

<hr>

<section id="references">
  <h3>References</h3>
  <p>Christopher, M. (2016) <em>Logistics &amp; Supply Chain Management</em>. 
5th edn. Harlow: Pearson Education Limited.</p>
  <p>Deloitte (2020) <em>The Future of Manufacturing: Insights on Automation and
Quality Risk</em>. Available at: <a href="https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/manufacturing/articles/future-of-manufacturing.html" target="_blank" rel="noopener">https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/manufacturing/articles/future-of-manufacturing.html</a> [Accessed 15 Oct 2024].</p>
  <p>ENISA (2023) <em>ENISA Threat Landscape Report</em>. European Union Agency 
for Cybersecurity. Available at: <a href="https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/enisa-threat-landscape-2023" target="_blank" rel="noopener">https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/enisa-threat-landscape-2023</a> [Accessed 18 Oct 2024].</p>
  <p>Huda, M. (2024) â€˜Trust as a key element for quality communication and 
information managementâ€™, <em>International Journal of Organisational 
Analysis</em>, 32(10), pp. 2156â€“2174.</p>
  <p>Majola, M.X. (2025) â€˜A Proposed Framework For E-portfolio Use to Enhance 
Teaching and Learning: Process E-portfolioâ€™, <em>International Journal of 
Educational Management</em>.</p>
  <p>Rolfe, G., Freshwater, D. and Jasper, M. (2001) <em>Critical Reflection in 
Nursing and the Helping Professions</em>. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.</p>
</section>
